.\" (C) Copyright 2021 Josh Boudreau <jboudreau@45drives.com>,
.\"
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH AUTOTIER 8 "March 19 2021" "autotier 1.1.3"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.

.SH NAME
autotier \- a passthrough FUSE filesystem that intelligently moves files
between storage tiers based on frequency of use, file age, and tier fullness.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.SS MOUNTING FILESYSTEM
.BI "autotierfs " "\fR[\fP-choqvV\fR]\fP mountpoint " "\fR[-o\fP " "fuse\fR,\fPoptions\fR,...]\fP"
.SS AD HOC COMMANDS
.BI "autotier " "\fR[\fP-chqvV\fR]\fP command \fR[\fParg1 arg2 \fR...]\fP"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B autotier
acts as a passthrough fuse filesystem to combine multiple underlying filesystems, or
.IR tier s,
into one pool of storage. Each
.I tier
should be a separate filesystem. Any number of
.IR tier s
can be defined in the configuration file for autotier. Files are moved between each
.I tier
based on their
.IR popularity ,
and
.B autotier
will attempt to keep the percent usage of each 
.I tier
below the 
.IR tier 's
.IR watermark .

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-c\fR,\fP \-\^\-config " "path/to/config/file"
Override configuration file path (default /etc/autotier.conf).
.TP
.B "\-h\fR,\fP \-\^\-help"
Display usage message and cancel current command.
.TP
.BI "\-o\fR,\fP \-\^\-fuse-options " "comma\fR,\fPseparated\fR,\fPlist"
Options for fuse filsystem. See
.B fuse(8)
for details.
.TP 
.B "\-q\fR,\fP \-\^\-quiet"
Mute log output, other than warnings and errors. Overrides
.I Log Level
in the configuration file to 0.
.TP
.B "\-v\fR,\fP \-\^\-verbose"
Print debug level output. Overrides
.I Log Level
in the configuration file to 2.
.TP
.B "\-V\fR,\fP \-\^\-version"
Print
.B autotier
version and exit. Prints unicode logo as well if log level is 1 or higher. Combine with
.I -q
to mute logo output.

.SH MOUNTING
.SS MANUALLY
.BI "autotierfs " "\fR[\fPflags\fR]\fP mountpoint " "\fR[\-o\fP " "fuse\fR,\fPoptions\fR,...]\fP"
.SS IN FSTAB
.B autotierfs
.I mountpoint
.IR fuse , options ",..."
0 0
.SS RECOMMENDED FSTAB SETTINGS
.B autotierfs
.I mountpoint
.IR default_permissions , allow_other
0 0

.SH AD HOC COMMANDS
.TP
.B config
Print current configuration values.
.TP
.B help
Display usage message and cancel current command.
.TP
.B list-pins
Show all pinned files along with the tier they are pinned to.
.TP
.B list-popularity
Print all files in filesystem along with their popularity scores (accesses per hour).
.TP
.BI oneshot " \fR[\fPfake tier period\fR]\fP"
Execute tiering of files immediately. A fake tier period (integer, seconds) can optionally be passed if using
.B cron
to trigger tiering so file popularity can still be calculated. Normally, file popularity is not modified
by
.BR "autotier oneshot" .
.TP
.BI "pin \fR\*(lq\fP" "tier name" "\fR\*(rq\fP " "path/to/file " \fR[\fP "path/to/file \fR...]\fP"
Move files into the given tier and keep them there regardless of their popularity scores.
.TP
.B status
Print info about each tier, including the tier name, path, usage, and watermark.
.TP
.BI "unpin " "path/to/file \fR[\fPpath/to/file \fR...]\fP"
Remove the "pinned" flag from each file to allow the tiering process to move it.
.TP
.BI "which-tier " "path/to/file \fR[\fPpath/to/file \fR...]\fP"
Display a table of each file passed in the argument list with the name of the tier containing the
file and the full backend path to that file. To see where each file is in a given directory, use
.IB \fR`\fP "find " "path/to/directory " "-type " "f \fR|\fP " "xargs autotier " "which-tier" \fR`\fP

.SH CONFIGURATION
The default location of the configuration file is
.BR /etc/autotier.conf .
.SS FORMAT
.B autotier
configuration contains sections and parameters. Sections are groupings of parameters that
begin with a header name in square brackets. There is one special section header name,
.IR global ,
which contains global autotier configuration parameters. Sections with headers containing anything
other than
.I global
are
.IR tiers .
The parameters of each section take the form of
.B Key
=
.IR value .

.SS GLOBAL PARAMETERS
The following parameters are to be put under the
.B [Global]
header.
.TP
.BI "Log Level \fR=\fP " "0\fR|\fP1\fR|\fP2"
The level at which to print log messages. If the value is
.IR 0 ,
all informational messages are muted and only warnings and errors are printed. If the value is
.IR 1 ,
normal informational log messages are printed. If the value is
.IR 2 ,
debug messages will also be printed. This value is overridden by the
.I --verbose
and
.I --quiet
flags.
.TP
.BI "Tier Period \fR=\fP " "n"
Number of seconds between each tiering of files. Must be an integer in the range [0, INT64_MAX].
.TP
.BI "Strict Period \fR=\fP " "true\fR|\fPfalse"
If
.IR true ,
file tiering strictly happens once per period. If
.IR false ,
tiering can be triggered after writing to a file
when the tier is past it's quota. Default value is
.IR false .
.TP
.BI "Metadata Path \fR=\fP " "/full/path/to/metadata"
Optional. If undefined,
.B autotier
defaults to using
.I /var/lib/autotier
as the path to store metadata in. To mount
.B autotier
as an unprivileged user, set this path to somewhere with write permissions for that user.
.TP
.BI "Copy Buffer Size \fR=\fP " " n [prefix][i]B"
Size of buffer to use while moving a file from one tier to another. Smaller buffers will use less memory, but larger
buffers may be more efficient while tiering.
.I n
is a positive real number and
.I prefix
= 
.IR K | M | G | T | P | E | Z | Y .
Include
.I i
between the 
.I prefix
and
.I B
to use base-1024 units instead of base-1000. Default size is
.IR "1 MiB" .

.SS TIER DEFINITIONS
Pick a friendly name for the tier and use that as the header name.
There needs to be at least two tiers, however there is no upper limit. That said, keep the number of tiers reasonable.
The following parameters are to be put in each tier section.
.TP
.BI "Path \fR=\fP " "/full/path/to/tier"
The path to the tier mountpoint/directory. Keep in mind that each tier should be in a
separate filesystem for intended functionality.
.TP 
.BI "Quota \fR=\fP " "n unit"
The tier's quota. Tier usage is kept under this value.
It can either be a percent of the tier's capacity, or an absolute value.
To set it to a
.IR percent ,
use
.IR "Quota " = " n %" ,
where
.I n 
is a positive integer in the range [0, 100].
To use an absolute value, use
.IR "Quota " = " n [prefix][i]B" ,
where
.I n
is a positive real number and
.I prefix
= 
.IR K | M | G | T | P | E | Z | Y .
Include
.I i
between the 
.I prefix
and
.I B
to use base-1024 units instead of base-1000.
While moving files around,
.B autotier
attempts to keep the percent usage of each tier below this level.

.SS EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION
.br
# autotier config
.br
[Global]               # global settings
.br
Log Level = 1          # 0 = none, 1 = normal, 2 = debug
.br
Tier Period = 10       # number of seconds between file move batches
.PP
[SSDs]                 # tier name
.br
Path = /mnt/ssd_pool   # full path to tier storage pool
.br
Quota = 15 TiB         # abs usage at which to stop filling tier
.PP
[HDDs]
.br
Path = /mnt/hdd_pool
.br
Quota = 70 %       # % usage at which to stop filling tier
.PP
[Cold Storage]
.br
Path = /mnt/cold_storage
.br
Quota = 100 %
.br

.SH AUTHOR
.B autotier
was created by \fBJosh Boudreau\fP <\fIjboudreau@45drives.com\fP> and is maintained by the \fBResearch and Development\fP team at \fB45Drives\fP.
